---
author:
- Raul Masu
copyright:
  link: 'https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/'
  text: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
  type: 'CC-BY'
journal:
  title: erre
lang: en
title: 'Book Club 2nd meeting - There''s No App for That: Technology and
  Morality in the Age of Climate Change, Overpopulation, and
  Biodiversity Loss - Richard Heinberg'
---

**Notice:** This file is an auto-generated download and, as such, might
include minor display or rendering errors. For the version of record,
please visit the HTML version or download the PDF.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

**License:** [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(CC-BY 4.0)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

</div>

::: {.pub-body-component}
::: {.editor .Prosemirror}
There's No App for That: Technology and Morality in the Age of Climate Change, Overpopulation, and Biodiversity Loss - Richard Heinberg
=======================================================================================================================================

Free available at:
https://www.postcarbon.org/publications/theres-no-app-for-that/

People present in the book club meeting: Lior Arbel, Alex Lucas, Charlie
Reimer, Alexandra Tibbitts, Johnny Sullivan, Raul Masu.

\

\

This book has been proposed by Adam, who could not attend the meeting
but wrote the following:

*"I following the Postcarbon Institute and*
[*Resilience.org*](http://Resilience.org)* for a while now, reading a
number of Richard Heinberg's blogposts. His essay There's no app for
that, was the first time I really became aware of the problems
underlying a techno-solutionist approach to combating climate change and
related issues. In addition, the focus on post- or de-growth has struck
a chord with me.*

*While we certainly should embrace low- and zero-carbon technologies,
there are pitfalls in externalising solutions that propose to fix our
problems while allowing us to live the way we always did. It's been a
while since I read the text, but it drove the point home for me, that we
need to rethink our entire system and not only implement green
technologies. We cannot consume ourselves out of this problem, but need
to address the problem by questioning the habits that got us here in the
first place.*

*And I suspect there may be parallels to draw and lessons to learn for a
community such as ours, that heavily relies on technology (although I
agree that technology is not a new invention; the plow was a very
succesful piece of modern technology once).*

*Richard Heinberg has been criticised for his appearance in Michael
Moore's depressing and error-prone documentary Planet of the Humans,
where Heinberg talks about population growth as a global problem, which
of course, from a resource-perspective is not the whole truth: the real
problem is the overconsumption of the privileged and a failure to
distribute resources evenly. This is not expressed in the Moore
documentary, but from what I know of Heinberg's writing, this is also
his point of view. In the end, he is a privileged white male and, as
such, his thinking is likely to be biased in more or less obvious
ways."*

\

During the discussion there was a general agreement about the importance
of some points of the book. For istamve, the book is a very effective
introductory text laying out the main issues related to
techno-solutionism applied to environmental issues. The book is quite
effective in pointing out that the idea that someone will invent a
technology able to solve climate change is such a huge illusion, and
argue that a moral switch is necessary to really address it.

A particularly appreciated point is the fact that the book addresses the
need to rethink the constant growth in the number of members of our
species. In our discussion, we particularly value this point as this
topic is scarcely touched in public debate if not denied at all.
Population is the ultimate taboo when it comes to climate change
discussion.

Another topic that the book touches on is the necessary continuous
increment in energy production necessary to sustain our economy and the
request for continuous growth in production. The continuos grow, is also
connected to social disequality. In particular, Heinberg highlighted the
following connections.

"*Policy makers seemingly must do four things at once in order to keep
social and ecological chaos at bay: (1) reduce economic inequality, (2)
accommodate a growing global population, and (3) reduce human impacts on
the environment (notably climate change and biodiversity loss), all
while (4) growing their economies. Yet from a practical standpoint, the
second aim is at odds with the first and the third: a growing population
tends to increase (not reduce)environmental impacts*" pag 33

Related to economic inequality, we found the following quotes with
reporting in this document:

"*Henry Wallich (1914--1988), an American economist and central banker
once said 'Growth is a substitute for equality of income. So long as
there is growth there is hope, and that makes large income differentials
tolerable.' If Wallich's quote is true, then so is the reverse. Greater
equality of income is a substitute for growth, and it's an indispensable
one, given the economy's expansion beyond biophysical limits*" Pag. 34

One of the possible ideas to solve this issue is decoupling GDP growth
from energy and resource consumption. However, decoupling that has been
claimed to be achieved, seems to actually be the result of false
accounting.

"*Without decoupling, the contradiction between reducing inequality on
one hand, and resolving our environmental problems on the other, remains
firmly in place. Worse still, it turns out that "demographic transition"
is really just a theoretical construct that doesn't fit the data evenly
and doesn't necessarily have much predictive value*" pag 35-36

During the discussion, Alex Tibbitts proposed the following reflection:
"One thought for the group, this was written in 2017 \-- so the
perspective is rather dated now. What aspects of the book would Heinberg
update today?"

This challenge led to a reflection on the following point "*The notion
that all technologies are neutral is naïve: each embodies an agenda, and
that agenda may or may not align with the priorities and values of a
majority of citizens*." pag 54

Dopamine rush in phones and tablets is becoming a problem in today\'s
relation to technology that was not so central in 2017. Charlie
"Dopamine rush is a topic that comes up a lot in the media that I read."
Here\'s a basic article on the topic:

<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/mar/04/has-dopamine-got-us-hooked-on-tech-facebook-apps-addiction>

<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/mar/13/digital-wellness-phone-addiction-tech>

One limit that we found in the book (particularly raised by Lior) is
that it is quite mild in suggesting solutions. Apart from strong
sentences on the need to reduce the number of children per family, with
we acknowledge as a strong point, we did not find any strong enough
suggestions in this book.

In the final part of the discussion, we reconnect the discussion to the
design of music technology, trying to reflect on how this book could
influence the development of an agenda of our music technology.

Alex commenting on her project with Jonny about the augmented arp
(https://bionicharp.ist/), said that one element she was happy about it
was the fact that they were not creating a new instrument, so no
creating waste, but adapt an instrument that they already had (the arp).
This idea can probably be extended to augmented instruments in general
and to systems that integrate traditional instruments with digital
systems. However, more thorough research should be done to surely assess
this.

One question that we propose as an outcome of this discussion is how
much "waste" is ok in the design process of a new musical instrument?

The idea to make nice NIMEs made for standing, crafted in nice materials
with the collaborations of artisans, whose ability would craft wooden or
other tangible (non-digital) components siding the crafting ability
needed to program the digital components.

What about the old instruments" There are many research centers that
probably have DMI graveyards. Johnny mentioned that at McGill Univerity,
they are trying to reuse old instruments for new studies and
performances. Such an approach is definitely valuable in reducing waste
and prolong the benefits related to the creation of new DMIs.

In a final remark, we also pointed out that reducing consumption can
have an economic impact on those who produce stuff. Despite we do not
like waste and have a general agonism toward the current economical
model, we agreed that a general economic collapse is not desirable, as
it would most likely primarily affect the poorest layer of the
population. Hower making good product design for last and maintaining it
could (hopefully) be an alternative model. It is important to note that
none of us is an expert in economy, so this final remark is more though
than an actual informed reflection.

Book club telegram group: https://t.me/joinchat/sFbB7cmED3BiYjNk

::: {.pub-notes}
:::
:::
:::
